This very short episode is just a small deposit to get this podcast started. I looked around and I saw that there was really no good Python podcast anymore, there used to be but for some reason they all stopped; so I decided it's time to take some action and create a podcast for everybody out there in the Python community. So I hope you will all enjoy and I hope you will let me know what you think of the show, by contacting me.
First though, I want to let you know we have some fantastic episodes and some brilliant guests lined up for the very first set of shows. One of the first guests is going to be Mike Bayer, who is the creator and maintainer of SQLAlchemy. SQLAlchemy is a really fantastic ORM that lets you talk to all sorts of relational databases.
On the other side, maybe we want to talk about no SQL and non relational databases, so we are going to have Jesse Davis, from MongoDB on our show as well, and Jesse is the maintainer and the author of the PyMongo, the PyMongo driver as well as a ton of other amazing Python OpenSource projects. So we are going to talk to Jesse about Python , about MongoDB maybe even some AsyncIO. We are also going to talk about web services; we are going to focus on Eve, which is an OpenSource REST API and we are going t talk to Nicola Iarocci about Eve. It should be a fascinating conversation. I hope you are looking forward to these conversations as much as I am.
Now before you go, I hope you will go over to Talkpythontome.com and click on 'friends of the show'. There you can become a friend of the show- all you have to do is give us your email address, we'll send out notifications when upcoming shows are going on, we'll send out questionnaires and pools asking about what topics you might want us to cover next, things like that. So, go over to talkpythontome.com, click on 'friends of the show' and become a friend of the show right now. Speaking of which, if you've got a topic you want featured or you want to give us some sort of feedback, email us- just go over to talkpythontome.com/home/contact and there is a couple of ways in which you can get in touch with us. You can either email us or contact us on Twitter.
